Node.js has completely changed the way JavaScript is used for development. Earlier JavaScript was considered as a client-side language because it runs on a browser and is mostly used for client-side validations, animations, and interaction.
Node.js takes that to the next level by allowing JavaScript to run on a server-side, which means you can now write JavaScript applications that can execute without a browser. Node JS uses Google Chrome’s execution engine and asynchronous processing to do this.
All you need to do is include a node.js script in your application, and you are ready to create server-side applications in JavaScript, which wasn’t possible until a few years back.
Node.js has also played an essential role in doing full-stack development using just one programing language because now it’s possible for a JavaScript developer to create an end-to-end web application using Node.js and React.js or whatever stack they want. The bottom line is they will be using JavaScript on both the client and server sides.
Because of the immense popularity of Node.js and JavaScript, many programmers are also learning JavaScript and Node.js framework to become web developers, mainly full-stack developers, and that’s where these online courses help a lot.
In the past, I have shared some of the best Node.js online courses for Web developers, which many of my readers liked a lot and appreciate it. Still, some of them also asked about the free alternatives of those paid courses so that they start without investing any money.
Thankfully, the internet is full of excellent free resources, and I also encourage you to learn from them. They are not only best to get an idea of what node.js is and how it helps you to create a server-side application in JavaScript but also can teach you all the nitty-gritty of node.js and walk you through creating an end-to-end application.
Even though I am a nerd and have read hundreds of books, online courses have changed the way I learn new technologies. Now I start with a class, learn the basics like setting up my dev environment and writing my first few programs. Once I get the hang of technology, I follow up with a book to further consolidate and learn that in depth.
I’ll share the Node.js books later, but this is the time for some of the best free online Node.js courses from Coursera, Udemy, Pluralsight, and edX.org to kick-start your Node.js development journey.
Btw, If you don’t mind paying a few bucks for learning something as valuable as Node.js, then I also suggest you check out Nodejs — The Complete Guide by Maximilian, one of my favorite Udemy instructors. This is also, one of the best courses to self-taught Node.js yourself.